                How to Read the Data from an HDF5 File

                       Notes, Plans, Approach


Notes loosely based on a conversation with 
Cheryl Craig: 27 March 2008, approx 4:00 pm
-------------------------------------------

What Cheryl had in mind at the time of the original conversation with Ruth 
was an HDF5-focused document, rather than HDF-EOS- or HDF-EOS5-focused 
(HE or HE5, respectively).  

Such a document does not, however, appear to be as critical for ESDIS as we 
at THG had initially thought.  Ten years ago, at the time of the initial EOS 
satellite and instrument launches, and 4 years ago, with the AURA launch, such 
documents would have had substantial value, but ESDIS is now an established 
program and new users are relatively rare.  While it's still a worthwhile 
concept, the need is not as great as it once was.  

Therefore, though we see substantial value in such documents, THG is 
reconsidering whether to undertake this specific project at this time.  These 
notes are prepared to capture the ideas, a proposed document outline, etc., 
that were generated in the course of this and related discussions for the day 
when this project or a similar one might be undertaken.


The document
------------
Beginning users are the target audience for this document.  The intent is to 
help these new users overcome the hurdles faced in learning to use HDF5.  
One such hurdle is the extensive setup that HDF5 requires, e.g., the need to 
set up property lists, in-memory versus on-disk datatypes, memory structures, 
etc.

The focus therefore should be strictly on the basics; more advanced topics, 
such as subsetting, might be mentioned but not specifically discussed; 
a reference to a section in a more advanced document would be appropriate.
[Such cross-references might also illuminate gaps in existing docs.]

The document should be ...
    -- Small enough to work through in an afternoon
    -- Two to 5 pages of running text, physically more pages 
       with figures and code examples inserted
To the extent possible, the experience should emulate working with a mentor 
to learn the basics of working with existing HDF5 data.


Proposed document structure: 

I.    Discovering the contents of a file
      a.  h5ls and h5dump
      b.  HDFview and HDF Explorer 
          For both,
          1.  Open
          2.  Scan the structure
          3.  Read data
          4.  See the layers 

      --  Discuss just a few tools so as not to overwhelm the reader.
      --  Include a sample data file that is referenced in the examples
          and that the user can use "to follow along" or to explore 
          independetly.

II.   Extracting data with HDF5 calls
      a.  Navigating and locating the data
      b.  Setting up for data handling
      c.  Reading the data
          1.  Simple raw data
          2.  More complex data (e.g., arrays, compound datatypes)
          3.  [Subsetting and more advanced topics, treated only with 
              references to more advance documents]
      d.  Exporting or massaging the data for further manipulation
          [Beyond scope?  See note below.]

III.  Sample codes
      a.  Two sets of code: one instructional, the other for copy-and-paste 
          use:
          1.  Simple code to present the logic and programming models, 
              i.e., without good-practice elements such as error checking.
          2.  More complete code for actual use, including the essentials
              of good practice.
      b.  Both C and Fortran codes; in Cheryl's community, at least, 
          "We're all Fortran programmers." 
      c.  All codes should compile and run properly.


Additional notes and comments
-----------------------------
Code examples:
Cheryl regularly and successfully uses the examples as a basis for coding.
[Hence the consideration of two sets of sample codes: one simple code that 
illustrates the algorithm without the distractions of otherwise-necessary code;
a second version of each sample code for cut and paste use that employs 
good programming practices with error checking, etc.]

Possible supporters 1 -- NPOESS, perhaps?
The NPOESS format is quite complex; if NPOESS users start trying to read NPOESS
data with pure HDF5, they are going to need substantial assistance.  They will 
also face a significant API hurdle as the NPOESS interface resembles HDF5 even 
less that HE5 does; there will be no simple mapping.

Possible supporters 2 -- ESDIS
There may come a day when the HDF-EOS APIs are no longer supported.  Unless
someone picked it up on a voluntary basis, the interface would presumably 
eventually cease to work.  [HE and HE5 support is currently a one-person 
operation, Abe Taaheri.  If Abe tires of that role and moves on, it is an open 
question as to whether there would be a successor.]  A document such as "How 
to Read the Data from an HDF5 File" would be very useful to a large number of 
ESDIS data users if that were to happen. 

This document would become increasingly valuable as time goes on and NASA data 
users get further away from the days of ESDIS support.  Cheryl suspects that
the HDF5 interfaces will stay around a lot longer than the HE interfaces and 
"people should still want to access this data for 30+ years." [All of which is 
entirely consistent with THG's mission to maintain data accessibility for the 
forseeable future.]

For that purpose, "How to Read the Data from an HDF5 File" could be presented 
as "A document with general guidelines for how to read HDF5 data.  The document
will provide specific guides for reading data applicable to or produced by the 
AURA satellite and associated instruments and will include example codes."  
[An appeal to NASA's expressed long-term data access requirement might be in 
order.]

Also, there is apparently some consideration among teams associated with 
instruments launched earlier in the EOS cycle (hence encoded with HE rather 
than HE5) of translating the resulting data products to HDF5-based formats 
(HE5, presumably).  The proposed document would have increased value for NASA 
if that were to happen; users of that data would generally be new to HDF5 and 
would benefit from the guidance and code examples provided.

Include HDF-EOS5 interfaces?
This is envisioned as an HDF5-focused document; it is not intended for users 
of the HE5 interface.

High-level HDF5 APIs:
Cheryl and I did not discuss it, but on the theory that it is easier to use,
it seems reasonable that this document should attempt to use the HDF5 Lite 
(H5LT) high-level API.  An attempt to stick exclusively to H5LT for basic files
might spotlight functionality that THG may wish to add to H5LT.

Scope -- Item II-d:
Outline item II-d, "Exporting or massaging the data for furhter manipulation,"
is probably beyond the scope of this document.  A reference to the regular
documentation is presumably more appropriate.

ESDIS data product files:
To Cheryl's knowledge, all ESDIS data product files are in the HE or HE5 
formats.  All HE5 data would be available through the HDF5 APIs, though the 
user (or a high-level HDF5 API developer) would have to recreate the HE5 
structural and data relationships.

